 //notes include all those stuff that could be forgotten

module Metabolism 
{

	Session 1 {
		* 45 essential nutrients
		* water is an essential nutrient, while carbs are not

		classify nutrients:
			energy_yielding = [carbs, lipids, proteins]
			
			nutrient_commonness:
				micronutrients = [vitamins, minerals]
				macronutrients = [water, carbs, lipids, proteins]
			
			stucture_type:
				organic_nutrients = [carbs, lipids, proteins, vitamins]
				inorganic_nutrients = [water, minerals]

		* 13 Vitamins
		
		define BMI:
			bmi < 18.5 -> underweight
			18.5 <= bmi < 25 -> normal
			25 <= bmi < 30 -> overweight
			30 <= bmi < 35 -> obesity type 1	disease risk high
			35 <= bmi < 40 -> obesity type 2	very high
			bmi >= 40 -> obesity type 3		goodbye my friend

		//orlistat decreases lipid absorption by inhibiting lipases.
		//sibutramine surpresses appetite.

		when hungry:
			stomach(ghrelin)
			ghrelin -> hypothalamus("yo feed me plz")

		when !hungry:
			intestine([cck, pyy])
			pancreas(insulin)
			adipose_tissues(leptin)
			all -> hypothalamus("stop eating wtf")

		//shivering is orchestrated by posterior hypothalamus
		//response to heat is orchestrated by anterior hypothalamus

		//There are four primary mechanisms by which heat is transferred to the environment: 1. Radiation 2. conduction 3. convection, 4. evaporation
	}

	Session 2:
		FateOfPyruvate:
			1- Acetyl-CoA, enzyme: Pyruvate Dehydrogenase, cofactors, coenzymes: {NADH, FADH2, Thiamine Pyrophospate, CoA, Lipoic Acid}	   Irreversible
			2- Oxaloacetate, enzyme: Pyruvate Carboxylase, cofactors: Biotin                                                                 Irreversible
			3- Lactic Acid, enzyme: Lactate Dehydrogenase														   Reversible
			4- Alanine, enzyme: Alanine Aminotransferase, cofactors: pyridoxal phosphate									   Reversible

	Session 3:

		FunctionsOfGlutathionine:
			a. Steroid synthesis in gonads, adrenal glands
			b. Fatty acid synthesis in adipose tissue and mammary gland
			c. Fatty acid, cholesterol, and bile acid synthesis in liver
			f. Detoxification of drugs: liver microsomal P450 enzymes detoxify most of
			the drugs and other foreign substances with the help of NADPH
			g. Prevention of Met-Hemoglobinemia

		Favism (broad beans) contains:
			1- Purine glycoside
			2- Isovarmine
			3- Vicine

	Session 4:
		Beta-oxidation rounds = Acetyl-CoA - 1
		Acetyl-CoA = Carbons / 2

		Total number of ATP (Old Calculation) = Acetyl-CoA * 12 + Beta-Oxidation rounds * 5
		Total number of ATP (New Calculation) = Acetyl-CoA * 10 + Beta-Oxidation rounds * 4

		Energy yield (Old Calc) = Total number of ATP (Old Calc) - 1
		Energy yield (New Calc) = Total number of ATP (New Calc) - 2 

		Ex: 16 Carbon fatty acid:
			Acetyl-CoA = 8
			Beta-Oxidation rounds = 7

			Total ATP = 8 * 12 + 7 * 5 = 131
			Energy yield = 131 - 1 = 130
	
	Session 5:
		Ketone Bodies:
			Examples/ Acetoacetate, B-Hydroxybutyrate, Acetone
			
			Synthesis Occurs in mitochondrial matrix during fasting state
			Synthesizes when excessive B-oxidation of fatty acids result in excessive acetyl-coa
			liver is primary site for ketone body synthesis
			HMG CoA Synthase is the rate limiting enzyme

		HMG CoA Reductase is inhibited by cholesterol, it controls cholesterol biosynthesis.
		LCAT, ACAT make cholestrol esters.

		Types of Dyslipidemia:
			2a- Hypercholestrolemia, LDL receptor deficiency, Elevated LDL only.
			2b- Hyperlipoprotienemia, Decreased LDL receptors and increased APO B// LDL, VLDL, Triglycerides are high.

		Phenotypic dyslipidemia:
			1- Hypercholestroloemia
			2- Hypertriglyceridemia
			3- Mixed dyslipidemia

		Amino Acid catabolism: Starts by removing the Amino group of the amino acid by:
			1- Transamination: Transfers amino group of an amino acid to a keto acid, to form a new amino acid, keto acid.  (ALT, AST)
			2- Deamination:
				1- Oxidative: (Oxidase, Dehydrogenase)
				2- Non-Oxidative: (Serine, Cysteine, Histidine) -> (Dehydratase, DeSulfhydrase, Histidase)

	Session 6:
		types of Conjugation reactions:
			1- Glucuronidation
			2- Sulfation
			3- Amination
	
	Session Semi-Final:
		Adrenal Oversecretions:
			Male_Androgens: Virilization
			Catecholamines (Epinephrine and norepinephrine): Pheochromocytoma
			Glucocorticoids: Cushing Syndrome
			Aldosterone: Obvious asf Bruh
}

module HDP
{

	Session 1:
		3 Parts Of Epidemiology:
			1- Investigating causes of diseases, and evaluating interventions.
			2- Effects of clinical decisions on other patients.
			3- Defining the extent of medical problems.

		Why do we need epidemiology:
			1- We can't figure out the cause of a disease without considering a large group of people with the same disease.
			2- Its impossible to treat a patient without having indirect effect on other patients.  (So we need a population perspective of treating)
			3- We can't plan a treatment service without knowing the extent of the disease.

		5 Objectives of epidemiology:
			1- To find the cause and risk factors of a disease.
			2- To find the extent of the disease.			 (How much it burdens the patients)
			3- To get the history of the disease, and the prognosis of the disease.
			4- To evaluate new preventive and therapeutic messures, and new modes of healthcare delivery.
			5- To provide a foundation for developing a public policy, and regulatory decisions for enviromental problems.
	
	Session 2:
		Uses Of census data:
			1- Predicting population size and projection of future population size assuming birth, death, migration rates.
			2- Info about population age, sex, residence place.
			3- Trends in population characteristics.
			4- Highlights regional differences.
		
		Messurement of morbidity in 3 units:
			1- People who were ill.
			2- People who experienced illnesses.
			3- The duration of the illness.
		
		Morbidity Data Include:
			1- Cancer Registers
			2- Communicable Diseases.
			3- Immunization and vaccination
			4- Congenital Malformations
			5- Abortions
	
	Session 5:
		Cohort Study:
			Advantages:
				1- Directly messures incidence rates and risks of a certain disease over time.
				2- Multiple outcomes.
				3- Efficent way of studying rare exposures.
				4- No recall bias.
				5- Can establish a temporal relationship between exposure and disease.
			
			Disadvantages:
				1- Time consuming and expensive.
				2- Large sample data.
				3- Not good for rare diseases.
				4- Cohort groups must follow up the cohort study until the end overwise bias will be inevitable.
				5- Not good for diseases that take a long time from exposure to onset. (as it will be more expensive and people might leave the cohort as time passes)

	
	Session 6:
	
		Case-Control Study:
			Odds = p/(1-p)		p: Prevalence
			Odds Ratio = (e-case / une-case) / (e-control / une-control)

			Advantages:
				1- relatively quick and cheap.
				2- quicker than cohort study, to study diseases that take a long time from exposure to onset.
				3- efficent way of studying rare diseases.
				4- Can look at several different risk factors.   (Multiple Exposures)

			Disadvantages:
				1- Can't messure incidence (risk) only odds.
				2- Susceptible to recall and selection bias if not well designed.
				3- Not good for rare exposures.
				4- Difficult to be sure about the temporal relationship between exposure and the disease.

	Session 7:

		Clinical Trial Features:
			1-Prospective, follow up of the trials.
			2- A control group which has a standard treatment or placebo.
			3- Participants are randomized into intervention group and control group.
			4- Double blinded, meaning that participants nor investigators know which participant belong to which group.

		Clinical trial types:
			1- Parallel trial:    multiple intervention groups and a control group.
			2- Crossover trial:   groups are both intervention and control groups, meaning they test both treatments but there is a washout period between.
			3- Cluster trial:	    Groups of patients or clinics or an entire population.
	
	Session 8:

		Bradford Hill Criteria of Causation:
			1- Strength of Association.
			2- Consistency of association.
			3- Specificity of association.
			4- Temporal sequence of association.
			5- Coherence of association.

	Session 9:

		Surveys and Cross-Sectional Studies:
			Advantages:
				1- Relatively quick and easy to conduct.
				2- Relatively cheap.
				3- Provide info on wide range of exposures and outcomes at the same time.
			
			Disadvantages:
				1- Bias gets made with the inclusion of chronic illness people.
				2- Its difficult to make temporal relationship between outcome and exposure.

		Ecological Studies:
			Advantages:
				1- Can look for associations in large populations.
				2- Uses existing data, therefore maybe efficent and quick.

			Disadvantages:
				1- Can't confirm association at Individual level.
				2- Can be difficult to conduct when exposure data is not readily available.
				3- Ecological Fallacy.		(Mistaken belief)

	Session Semi-final:
		
		Types of Observational Studies:
			Cohort, Case-control, survey, cross-sectional, ecological
		
		Types of Experimental Studies:
			Randomized Controlled Trials, Parallel Trial, Crossover trial, cluster trial, Factorial trial

		Hierarchy of evidence (Lowest to Highest):
			1-Expert opinions.
			2-Case reports, case series.			(1~3 participants)
			3-Cross-sectional study.
			4-Ecological study.
			5-Case-control Study.
			6-Cohort Study.
			7-Randomized Controlled Trials.
			8-Systematic reviews and meta-analysis of trials.

	Session Final:

		Clinical Audit and clinical research are both fundamental to improving healthcare services, they involve the following key steps:
			1- Identifying important(relevant) question.
			2- Collecting information about the question.
			3- Analysing the info.
			4- Interpreting the results.
			5- Sharing the findings to promote changes.

		Purpose of audit:
			1- To compare the care we provide to the care we AIM to provide.
			2- To allow clincal teams, identify deficiencies, and implement change.

		Key Steps of clinical audit:

			1- Planning.
			2- Identify a suitable topic to audit.
			3- Choosing the standards.
			4- Writing protocols.
			5- Collecting data.
			6- Analyzing the data.
			7- Interpreting the results.
			8- Sharing findings, and changing practice

		Audits can be used to look at any part of clinical care:
			1- Treatment
			2- Structure, e.g. number and mix of staff, number of beds in wards.
			3- Process, e.g. Waiting times, appointment booking, consultation.
			4- Outcome, e.g. length of hospital stay, survival, patient experience, quality of life.
		
}

module CPS
{
	Cystic Fibrosis:
		Symptoms:
			Infants:
				1- Obstructive Jaundice
				2- Meconium Ileus
				3- Failed to thrive (Decelerated Physical growth)

			Childhood:
				1- Pulmonary Infection
				2- Atypical Asthma
				3- Steatorrhea and malnutrition. 
				4- Esophageal Varices
				5- Nasal Polyps
				6- Hypersplenism

			Adulthood:
				1- Chronic Bronchitis
				2- Hemoptysis
				3- Chronic Abdominal pain
				4- Delayed sexual development

		Diagnosis:
			1- Sweat electrolyte testing.
			2- Neonatal screening using immunoreactive trypsin.

		Treatment:
			1- Reducing risk of pulmonary infection.
			2- Managing the adverse effect of the condition on organs. (Pancreas, Intestine, Reproductive)
			3- Antimicrobial therapy and physiotherapy.

		Other Pulmonary treatments:
			1- Hypertonic saline
			2- Dornase Alpha
			3- Azithromycin
			4- Tobramycin

		Gastrointestinal treatments:
			1- Fat-soluable vitamins.
			2- Pancreatic enzymes.

	Tuberculosis:
		Risk Factors:
			Patient Related:
				1- Age, Elders and children are most susceptible.
				2- First-generation immigrants from high prevalance countries.
				3- Close contacts of infected.
				4- Overcrowding
				5- Smoking
		
			Associated Diseases:
				1- Immunosuppression diseases. (HIV)
				2- Diabetes melitus.
				3- Chronic Kidney Disease.
				4- Measles in Children
				5- Malignancy
				6- Deficiency of vitamin D, A
				7- Silicosis
		
		Clinical Presentations of TB:
			1- Chronic Coughing, often with hemoptysis
			2- Pyrexia with unknown reasons.
			3- Excess pleural effusion
			4- Night sweat
			5- Weight loss, weakness

		Chronic Complications of TB:
			Pulmonary:
				1- Massive Hemoptysis
				2- Cor pulmonate		 (enlargement of right side of heart due to high blood pressure)
				3- Fibrosis/Emphysema
				4- Bronchiectasis
				5- Atypical Mycobaterium Infection
			
			Non-Pulmonary:
				1- Laryngitis
				2- Enteritis
				3- Polyarthritis
				4- Amyloidosis
		
		Diagnosis of tb:
			Pulmonary:
				1- Sputum Culturing
				2- Bronchoscopy
				3- Gastric Washing

			Extrapulmonary:
				1- Fluid Examination
				2- Tissue Biopsy

			*Tuberculin skin test
			Blood tests of: FBC (Full blood count), CRP (C-Reactive Protein), ESR (Erythrocyte Sedimination Rate (Higher means higher levels of general inflammation)

		Treatment of new TB patients:		H: Isoniazid, R: rifampicin, Z: Pyrazinamide, E: Ethambutol
			Intensive Phase: 2 Months of HRZE
			Continuation Phase:
				1- 4 Months of HR
				2- 4 Months of HRE

		Major Adverse reactions of HRZE:
			Isoniazid:
				1- Peripheral neuropathy
				2- hepatitis
				3- Rash
			
			Rifampicin:
				1- Hepatitis
				2- Rash
				3- Fever
				4- Gastrointestinal Disturbances

			Pyranziamide:
				1- Hepatitis
				2- Gastrointestinal Disturbances
				3- Hyperuricemia

			Ethambutol:
				1- Retrobulbar neuritis
				2- Arthalgia

	Iron Deficiency:
		we ingest 10-20 mg of iron/day.
		1/10 of ingested iron is absorbed.
		Gastric acid releases iron from food.
		
		iron is absorbed in reduced form.
		Ascorbate (Vitamin C) Increases iron absorption by reducing.
		Phytates, tannates, antacids decrease iron absorption by making complex with iron.

		Disorders of iron metabolism:
			1- Hemochromatosis: Increased absorption of iron.
			2- Iron Deficiency anemia: Decreased amount of iron.
			3- Anemia of chronic disease: Inflammation-induced change of iron distribution.
		
		Lab Features of iron deficiency anemia:
			Hypochromic microcytic erythocytes
			
			Low:
				HB, RBC, Serum Iron, Serum Ferritin, Transferrin saturation
			Low, Normal:
				WBC, Retics
			Low, Normal, High:
				Platelets
			High:
				RDW, TIBC (Total iron binding capacity), Serum Transferrin Receptor, FEP

		Causes of iron deficiency:
			1- Chronic blood loss
			2- Hemolysis and hemoglubinuria
			3- Increased demand of iron
			4- Malabsorption of iron
			5- Inadequate iron intake

		Symptoms of iron deficiency anemia:
			1- Tiredness, breathlessness
			2- Pallor
			3- Tachypnea, Tachycardia
			4- Postural Hypotension
			5- Ankle Edema

		Treatment:
			Ferrous Sulphate 200 mg 3 times a day, for 3-6 months.

	Syncope:
		Types of syncope:
			1- Cardiac Syncope: Due to mechanical dysfunction of heart or arrhythmia.
			2- Neurocardiogenic syncope (Reflex Syncope): abnormal autonomic reflex causes bradycardia and/or hypotension.
			3- Postual Hypotension: a specific standing causes hypotension.	(Typically because of dehydration) 

		Features of Cardiac Syncope:
			Premonitory Symptoms:
				1- Often None
				2- Lightheadedness
				3- Palpitation
				4- Chest pain, Breathlessness
			
			Unconscious Period:
				1- Extreme pallor
			Recovery:
				1- Rapid Flushing

		Features of Neurocardiogenic Syncope:
			Premonitory Symptoms:
				1- Nausea
				2- Lightheadedness
				3- Sweating

			Unconscious Period:
				1- Pallor
			
			Recovery:
				1- Slow Nausea
				2- Lightheadedness

		Features of Seizure:
			Premonitory Symptoms:
				1- Hyperexcitability
				2- Delirium
				3- Aura
				4- Olfactory Hallucinations

			Unconscious Period:
				1- Prolonged Unconsciousness
				2- Motor Seizure activity
				3- Tongue biting
				4- Urinary Incontinence

			Recovery:
				1- Prolonged Delirium
				2- Headache
				3- Focal neurological signs
	
		Difference between Syncope and seizure: (Seizure Syncope)
			1- Aura + -
			2- Cyanosis + -
			3- Post-ictal delirium + -
			4- Post-ictal amnesia + -
			5- Post-ictal headache + -
			6- Rapid Recovery - +
	
	Sickle Cell:
		Treatment of sickle cell disease:
			1- Blood Transfusion
			2- Oxygen therapy (used to treat acute chest syndrome)
			3- Bone-marrow transplantation
			4- Antibiotics (to treat infections)

		Other treatments for sickle cell:
			1- Hydroxyurea (Increase HbF)
			2- Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
			3- Iron Overload

		Clinical Manifestation:
			1- Anemia with jaundice due to chronic hemolysis.
			2- Acute Anemia, sudden drop in hemoglobin.
			3- Increased risk of infection due to damaged spleen
			4- Painful crises, vaso-occlusive crises affects many organs of the body.
			5- Priapism
			6- Splenomegaly
			7- Long-term problems:
				1- Short stature
				2- Delayed Puberty, Cognitive Disabilites
				3- Adenotonsillar Hypertrophy
				4- Cardiac enlargement
				5- Heart failure

		Treatment of acute crises (Vaso-occlusive crisis, Acute chest crisis, infection crisis):
			1- Painful crises treated with oral or intravenous analgesia use opiates if needed, good hydration (oral or intravenous).
			2- Infectious crises treated with antibiotics.
			3- Oxygen desaturation treated with oxygen.

			*in case of Acute chest syndrome, priapism, stroke exchange transfusion maybe required.
		
		To investigate a acute chest syndrome, we gather:
			1- Hemoglobin
			2- WBC
			3- Platelets
			4- Oxygen saturation
			5- Chest X Ray

		Treatment of acute chest syndrome:
			1-Exchange transfusion
			2-Giving oxygen by Continous positive airway pressure (cpap).
			3-Give Antibiotics.

		Prognosis of sickle cell disease:
			1- Around %50 of severe cases die before age 40.
			2- Mortality rate during childhood is %3, death is usually from infection.

	Falls:
		Falls is an acute illness.
		Falls in the young is dangerous (the cause of the fall is dangerous, not the fall itself).

		Risk Factors:
			1-Muscle Weakness
			2-Arthritis
			3-Depression
			4-Visual Impairment
			5-History of falls
			6-Age over 80 years

		Screening Investigation for acute illnesses:
			1- Full Blood count
			2- Urea and electrolytes
			3- Chest Xray
			4- ECG
			5- C-reactive protein
			6- Blood cultures (if pyrexial)

		Abnormal Gaits and probable causes:
			1- Antalgic			Arthropathy
			2- Waddling Proximal	Myopathy
			3- Stamping			Sensory neuropathy
			4- Foot drop		Peripheral neuropathy or Radiculopathy
			5- Ataxic			Sensory Neuropathy or Cerebellar disease
			6- Apraxic			Bilateral hemisphere lesions
			7- Hemiplegic		Cerebral hemisphere lesion
			8- Marche a petits	Small-vessel cerebrovascular disease

		Evidence-based intervention to prevent falls in old people:
			1- Balance Training
			2- Less chaotic enviroment.
			3- Correction of visual impairment
			4- Rationalization of medication. 
			5- Calcium and vitamin D supplement.

	Fatigue (Tiredness):
		Causes:
			1- Psychiatric Disease: Depression and anxiety and somatoform disorders.
			2- Neurologic Disease: muscles during examination are not weak.
			3- Sleep disorders: Obstructive sleep apnea.
			4- Endocrine disease: hypothyroidism
			5- Liver and kidney disease
			6- Obesity
			7- Physical Inactivity
			8- Malnutrition
			9- Infection: Chronic infection or acute infection
			10- Drugs:	Drug withdrawal, alcholism, medications such as (Anti-depressants, Anti-psychotics, Anxiolytics, opiates,
						anti-seizure agents, beta blockers).
			11- Cardiovascular and pulmonary disorders
			12- Malignancy
			13- Hematologic diseases
			14- Systematic inflammatory/ Rheumatological diseases
			15- Pregnancy
			16- Disorders of unclear cause

}

module MGD
{

	Session 1:
		Classification of amino acids according to their side chains:
			1- Aliphatic R groups: 		(Glycine, Alanine, Proline, Valine, Leucine, Isoleucine, Methionine)
			2- Aromatic R groups: 		(Phenylalanine, Tyrosine, Tryptophan)
			3- Polar Uncharged R Groups: 	(Cysteine, Serine, Threonine, Glutamine, Asparagine)
			4- Polar Negative charged R groups: (Aspartate (Aspartic Acid), Glutamate (Glutamic Acid))
			5- Polar Positive charged R groups:	(Histidine, Lysine, Arginine)

		To calculate isoelectric point of aminoacids:
			1- Neutral Side Chain:
				IP = (pKa1 + pKa2) / 2

			2- Positively charged side chain:			*No fucking idea whats this about just memorize duh
				IP = (pKa1 + pKa3) / 2

			3- Negatively charged side chain:
				IP = (pKa2 + pKa3) / 2

	Session 2:
		Alpha helix:
			*3.6 amino acids per turn
			* 0.54 nm pitch
		Beta pleated sheet:
			*Parallel and anti-parallel conformation
			*0.7nm per turn

		Chaperonins:
			Act as templates for proteins, to overcome kinetic and thermodynamic barrier in reaching a stable conformation.

	Session 3:
		Enzymes classed to 6 groups:
			1- Oxireductases
			2- Transferases
			3- Hydrolases
			4- Lysases:	Addition or removal of groups to form double bonds.
			5- Isomerases
			6- Ligases:	Formation of bonds at the expense of atp.

		Types of inhibitors:
			1-Irrversible Inhibitor: Covalently links with enzyme, destorys its function.
			2-Reversible Inhibitor:
				1- Competitive Inhibitor:
					1- Binds at active site
					2- Can be overcome by increasing [S].
					3- Affects km not Vmax

				2- Non-competitive Inhibitor:
					1- Bind at different site
					2- cannot be overcome by increasing [S]
					3- Affects vmax not km

		Regulatory mechanisms that affect enzyme activity:
			1- Regulation by changing [Substrate], [Product]
			2- Regulation by changing [Enzyme]:
				1- Regulation of enzyme synthesis. (rate of enzyme synthesis usually depends on the rate of transcription of mRNA)
				2- Regulated enzyme degradation. (by adding ubiquitin to it, to mark it for destruction)
			3- Regulation through conformational changes:
				1- Allosteric Regulation
				2- Regulation by covalent modifications. (Some enzymes activated by adding a phosphate group to it)

		Main mechanism which regulate blood clotting cascade:
			1- Inactive zymogens present at low concentration.
			2- Amplification at initial signal.
			3- Feedback activation by thrombin
			4- Termination of clotting.
				Fibrinolysis: Degradation of fibrin in a clot by plasmin.

		Protein C and its cofactor protein S:
			they serve to surpress coagulation cascade.
			APC (Activated Protein C) also stimulates the release of plasminogen activator and deactivates inhibitor of plasminogen activator, PAI-1.

	Session 4:
		Structural forms of dna double helix:
			A-form:
				11 base-pair per turn, produced by moderately dehydrating B-form.
			B-form:
				10 base-pair per turn, main form, 0.34 nm each turn.
			Z-form:
				Zig-zag left handed with 12 base-pair per turn.

		Dna polymerases:
			DNA Polymerase I: Fills the gaps between okazaki fragments.
			DNA Polymerase II: Functions in DNA Repair.
			DNA Polymerase III: Chain elongation at leading and lagging strands.

		Cell Cycle:
			Interphase:
				G1:
					This stage begins immediately after mitosis.
					RNA, Proteins, Organells are synthesized.
				S:
					DNA is replicated, chromosomes form sister chromatids.
				G2:
					Precursors of spindle fiber are formed.
					Mitochondria divdie.

			Mitosis:
				Prophase:
					1- Chromosomes Condense.
					2- Nuclear Envelope disappears.
					3- Centrioles divide and migrate to opposite poles.
					4- Spindle fibers form and attach to chromosomes.
				Metaphase:
					1- Chromosomes line up on the midline of dividing cell.
				Anaphase:
					1- Chromosomes begin to separate.
				Telophase:
					1- Chromosomes reach opposite poles
					2- New nuclear envelopes form.
					3- Chromosomes decondense.

			Cytokinesis:
				Cleavage forms.
				Cytoplasm divides.
			
			* G1, S, G2, M take 11h, 8h, 4h, 1h respectively.

	Session 5:
		The Central Dogma:
			DNA ----------------> RNA -------------> Protein
				Transcription	   Translation
			
			In some viruses, which their genetic material is RNA:
				RNA -----------------------> DNA ---------------> RNA -------------> Protein
				     Reverse Transcription	    Transcription        Translation

		Transcription Steps:
			1- Initiation:
				1- Promotors control how a gene is transcribed.
				2- Transcription factors help the RNA pol bind to the promotor, they bind to areas around the promotor.
				3- RNA pol bind to promotor to elongate the RNA.

			2- Elongation:
				As RNA pol moves along the DNA strand, it untwists the helix, 10~20 base pairs at a time.
				Transcription speed in eukaryotes is 24 nucleotides/s, in prokaryotes its 60 nucleotides/s.				

			3- Termination:
				In prokaryotes, the transcription stops at termination signal.
				1- In eukaryotes, The RNA pol adds the polyadenylation sequence, transcription process is stopped after 10~35 nucleotides past the polyadenylation sequence.
				2- RNA processing occurs.

		Transcription Regulators:
			1- Promoters
			2- Enhancers:
				1- Upstream sequences in eukaryotes that help to control the expression of genes.
				2- Can be thousands of nucleotides away from protein coding region.

			3- Silencers:
				* These transcription factors, prevent the DNA sequence from being transcribed.

		RNA Processing:
			1- 5' End gets a 5' Cap.
			2- 3' End gets a poly-A tail.
			3- Exons are spliced out.	(Splice means joining)

			These modifications serve the following purposes:
				1- Facilitate the export of mRNA.
				2- Protection from hydrolytic enzymes.
				3- Helping ribosomes attach to the 5' End.
		
		The Gene:
			Gene: Unit of heredity, a length of dna, that contains the code for a protein, and sequences necessary for its expression, promotors, introns, etc...

			Genes vary in size in humans, some are as long as 100 bases, some are more than 2 milion bases.
			Humans have 20000 to 25000 genes.

		Translation Components:
			1- tRNA:
				* Approximately 50 types.
				* Carboxyl end of amino acid is linked to 3' End of the tRNA with ester bond, and enzyme aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetase.

			2- rRNA and Ribosomes:
				Prokaryotes: Ribosome 70s, which is 30s small subunit, 50s large subunit.
				Eukaryotes: Ribosome 80s, which is 40s small subunit, 60s large subunit.

				Ribosomes has 3 sites for tRNA binding:
					1- E Site: binds the tRNA that carried the last amino acid.
					2- P Site: binds the tRNA attached to the growing peptide chain.
						* Peptidyl Transferase: is a P site enzyme that forms peptide bonds between amino acids.

					3- A Site: binds the tRNA carrying the next amino acid.

			3- mRNA: Carries the genetic code to be translated into protein.

		Translation:
			1- Initiation:
				1- A small ribosomal subunit binds to mRNA.
				2- Initiator tRNA binds to a specific codon on the mRNA.
				3- The large ribosomal subunit joins the complex, the initiator tRNA binds to P-Site, leaving the A site.
				4- Another tRNA binds to the A site, forming a peptide bond between the amino acid of the first tRNA and its amino acid.

			2- Elongation:
				1- As the ribosome moves along the mRNA, the tRNA at p site gets released in e site, and the tRNA in a-site moves to p site.
				2- New tRNA comes to a-site, elongation continues.

			3- Termination:
				* Termination codons are: UAA, UAG, UGA, no anti-codons exist for those.	(AUU, AUC, ACU are not correct anti-codons)

				1- As Ribosome reaches the stop codons, the polypeptide chain releases.
				2- Ribosomal subunits separate.
				3- The new protein undergoes several modifications.	(Post translational modifications)

		Characteristics of genetic code:
			1- Triplet code: The code is composed of codons, which specifies a particular amino acids, a reading of 3 bases called reading frame.
			2- Universality: Almost all organisms share the same genetic code, meaning same codon specifies same amino acid.
			3- Degeneracy Code: Some amino acids are specified by more than one codon.
				Wobble hypothesis: The third base of a codon, and the first base of an anti codon, can wobble.	(Not follow watson crick base-pairing rules)
			4- Non-overlapping and commaless
			5- Ordered code: Codon is read from 5' to 3'.
			6- Start and termination codons:
				1- Start codon: AUG methionine
					* Methionine might be removed from the protein, with certain proteases, although its the starting amino acid for every proteins.
				2- Stop codon: UAG, UGA, UAA codes for no amino acids.

	Session 6:
		Mendelian patterns of inheritance (controlled by single gene) classified into 5 groups:
			A- Autosomal Inheritance
				1- Autosomal dominant
				2- Autosomal recessive
			B- Sex-Linked inheritance
				1- X-Linked dominant
				2- X-Linked recessive
				3- Y-Linked inheritance (Rare)

	Session 8:
		Post translational modifications:
			1- Phosphorylation: causes the protein to activate, deactivate, modifying its function.
			2- Methylation: Increases hydrophobicity, neutralizes negative charge when attached to carboxyl group.
			3- Acetylation
			4- Sulfation: Sulfate group added to tyrosine residue.
			5- O-Linked Glycosylation: Carbohydrate added via glycosidic link to hyrdoxyl of Serine or Threonine, occurs in Golgi.
			6- N-Linked Glycosylation: Carbohydrate added via n-glycosyl link to nitrogen of asparagine(asn), occurs in ER.
			7- Ubiquitination: Ubiquitin attached to -NH2 of lysine, proteosome 26s recognizes the ubiquitin and degrades the protein.

		* Best Studied vesicle, has an outer layer protein called clathrin.

		Types of secretion:
			1- Constitutive secretion: Proteins packaged into vesicles and released continously.  (Serum albumin, collagen)

			2- Regulated secretion:	Proteins released in response to a signal, they are accumulated near the plasma membrane and wait for extracellular signals to secrete.
				(Hormones, enzymes, mucous)
		
		* Proteins that are destined to be inserted into the plasma membrane, lysosomes, Golgi/ER, are not synthesized on free ribsomomes, instead they synthesize on ribsomes on rough ER.
		
		Secreted Proteins have a signal sequence:
			1- 13~36 amino acid.
			2- 10~15 hydrophobic residues.
			3- 1 or more positively charged residues near the amino terminus.
			4- A few polar amino acids in the C-terminus region.

		Basic mechanisms of antibiotic action against bacterial cells:
			1- Inhibition of cell wall synthesis.
			2- Inhibition of protein synthesis.
			3- Inhibition of nucleic acid synthesis.
			4- Anti-metabolite activity.
			5- Alternation of cell membranes.
		
		Anti-microbial resistance mechanisms:
			1- limiting uptake of drug
			2- modifying drug
			3- inactivating drug

		Classification of antibiotics:
			1- Beta-lactum Antibiotics (Pencillin)
			2- Lincomycins (Lincomycin)
			3- Polyenes Antibiotics (Antifungal) (Nystatin)
			4- Polypeptide Antibiotics (Bacitracin)
			5- Aminoglycoside Antibiotics (Neomycin)
			6- Macrolide Antibiotic (Erythromycin)

	Session 9:
		Analysis of DNA:
			Molecular level: DNA Sequencing with sanger dideoxy chain termination method

			Gene level:
				1- Restriction analysis/ Gene cloning:
					Restriction enzymes: are bacterial enzymes that recognize a specific dna sequence and cut the double stranded dna at that specific site.
					* Restriction sites are short dna length 4~8 nucleotides.

					* The cut gene can be used in gene cloning, with DNA ligase can be recombined with Plasmid.
					
				2- Gel electrophoresis: DNA fragments can be separated by size. (Smaller DNA fragments migrate faster to positive electrode)

				3- Southern blotting/ Hybridisation:
					* A solid membrane is placed on the gel to transfer the DNA onto it, this is called southern blotting.	(northern blotting IF IT WAS RNA)
					* A probe, which is complementary to the DNA fragment, will be mixed. this helps recognizing the DNA fragment, this is called hybridisation.
 
				4- PCR:
					A repeated cycle, consists of denaturing, renaturing (to hybridize with primers) and polymerizing.
					* Main PCR components: DNA Sample, Primers, Nucleotides, Taq Polymerase (Special type of polymerase survives high temps).

					* Used in diagnosing many inherited diseases, and detecting the presence of tumoric cells.

			Chromosome Level:
				1- Karyotyping: A picture of chromosomes numbers, shapes, sizes in metaphase.
				2- FISH (Flurescent in situ hybridisation):
					A probing method, can be complementary to a gene, or multiple genes, can be used on centromeres, telomeres.
					* Its chromosome level probing.

		Analysis of Protein:
			Gel electrophoresis techniques:
				1- Native-PAGE: Migrates proteins based on their charge, weight, shape.
				2- SDS-PAGE: Migrates proteins based on their weight only.  (SDS denatures protein, one SDS for 2 amino acids, SDS has large negative charge)
					* After protein gel electrophoresis, Coomasie blue dye can be added, which labels the proteins.

				3- Isoelectric focusing: Protein migrates based on its isoelectic point, moves until it reaches the iP.
				4- 2D-electrophoresis: Combines SDS-PAGE and Isoelectric focusing (In one dimension, it migrates proteins by their iP, in the other dimension, it migrates proteins by their weight), important for proteomics.

			Immunological techniques:
				* Antibodies can be generated that are highly specific to a particular protein, this is important because it helps identifying a specific protein.
					(Protein equavalent of DNA probes)

				1- Western blotting: After SDS-PAGE, a membrane will be placed upon the gel, and antibodies will be added to label the migrated proteins.
				2- Enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assays (ELISA): Analyzes the concentration (According to an enzyme activity) of a specific protein in a mixture:
					1- Antibodies to the protein is first immobilized on a solid surface.
					2- The protein solution is added onto the antibody coated surface.
					3- The proteins bind to the antibodies, and other proteins are washed out.
					4- Another antibody binds to the Antibody-Protein complex.
					5- Binding of the previous antibody is messured by assaying the enzyme activity linked to it.	

			Enzyme assays:
				* The messurement of enzyme activiy can be clinically useful, as it shows whether an enzyme is present at normal ranges.
				*Enzyme assays can be used as a diagnostic tool for metabolic diseases. (G6PD Deficiency)

				Clinically important serum enzymes:
					Aspartate transaminase(AST)		Markers for liver damage
					Alanine transaminase(ALT)

					Amylase/ Lipase				Markers for pancreatitis
				
					gamma-glutamyl transferase(GGT)	Markers for liver damage, Increased by alcohol
					
					Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP)		Markers for bone disorders
					
					Acid Phosphatase (ACP)			Markers for prostate cancer

					Plasma cholinesterase			inhibited in organophosphate poisoning, decreased in liver disease

					Creatine kinase (CK)
					Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)		Markers for myocardial infarction

	Session 10:
		Categories of mutations:
			1- Somatic Mutations
			2- Germ-line Mutations

		Types of mutations:
			Point Mutation: A subsitute in a single nucleotide. (Transition: Purine -> Another Purine, Transversion Purine -> Pyrimidine)
				In a coding region (Exons):
					1- Missense mutation: Change a codon specifying amino acid, to another codon, which specifies another amino acid. (Sickle cell disease  GAG -> GTG)
					2- Silent mutation: Change a codon specifying amino acid, to another codon, specifying the same amino acid. (Does not alter protein function)
					3- Sense mutation: Change a stop codon, to a codon specifying amino acid.	(Produces longer protein than usual)
					4- Nonsense mutation: Change a codon specifying amino acid to a stop codon.	(Produces truncated proteins)
				
				In a non-coding region (Introns):
					1- Splice mutation: Occurs in splice site of introns. (Phenylketonuria)
 (
			Insertion or Deletion:
				A- Frameshift mutation:
					1- Frameshift-Insertion: Involves inserting 1, 2, more than 3, nucleotides. (Gaucher Disease)
					2- Frameshift-Deletion: Involves deleting 1, 2, more than 3 nucleotides.

				B- Triplet insertion: Involves inserting 3 or multiples of 3 nucleotides to coding region, leading to addition of amino acids.
				C- Triplet deletion: Involves deleting 3 or multiples of 3 nucleotides in coding region, leading to removal of amino acids.  (Duchenne muscular dystrophy)
				
				D- Allelic expansion: Increase in trinucleotide repeats.
					Ex: DMPK (Dystrophia myotonica protein kinase) gene has NORMAL 5~37 CTG repeats.
						Premutation: Expansion of the gene can occur, but not cause disease, 38~49 CTG repeats.
						
						Mutation: Myotonic dystrophy disorder can occur, in 50~thousands CTG repeats.
		
		Mutation rate depends on:
			1- Gene size
			2- Gene sequence
			3- Hotspot

		Chemicals causing mutation:
			1- Base analogs (Chemicals similar to bases) cause base pairing subtitution. (Thymine -> 5-bromouracil)
			2- Chemical modifications of bases: modifying properties of bases (Treatment of DNA with HNO2, causes cytosine -> uracil, by deamination)
			3- Alkylating agents (MMS, EMS)	MS: Methano sulfate
			4- Intercalating agents: Chemicals inserted into dna, distorts helix shape.  (Proflavine, Acridine orange)

		Physical mutagens:
			1- X-Ray
			2- Ultraviolet: common effect is dimmer formation between adjacent pyrimidines especially thymine.
			3- Gamma rays: they are used in killing cancer cells.
		
		DNA Repair System:
			1- Excision repair: Damaged DNA removed by excision of bases, and replacing with DNA polymerase:
				1- Nucleotide excision repair:
					* Recognizes helix distorting lesions (Thymine dimer)
					* Replaces upto 30 nucleotides
					* Excinuclease primary enzyme

				2- Base excision repair:
					* Recognizes specific nucleotide damage. (deamination, alkylating damages)
					* Replaces upto 1~5 nucleotides
					* Glycosylase primary enzyme

			2- Mismatch repair: Recognizes mismatched base pairs that do not follow watson-crick base pairing rules. (A-T, G-C)

		Failure of DNA System: protein p53 monitors DNA damage, if damage too severe, it will promote apoptosis.
	
		DNA Repair system disorders:
			1- Xeroderma Pigmentosum (XP): An autosomal recessive mutation, causes nucleotide exision repair system not to work, this causes extreme sensitivity to UV, as it can't repair thymine dimers.

			2- Trichothiodystrophy: Individuals have faulty nucleotide excision repair or base excision repair, or both.


	Session Final:
		* Most DNA-based clinical diagnoses rely on PCR Amplification.
		
		After PCR Amplification, detect the mutation by obtaining information related to the mutation:
			1- Info regarding a loss or gain of a restriction site in a PCR product.	(loss in sickle cell)
			2- Info regarding the size of the PCR product.	(Smaller size in CF)
			3- Presence or absence of a PCR product.
			4- DNA Sequence of the PCR product.

		Sickle Cell Anemia:
			* Caused by point mutation in the coding sequence of beta-globin gene, GAG -> GTG (Point mutation, Transversion), at 7th codon.
			* HbS is insoluble and sticks with other molecules in low oxygen conditions, causing sickle shaped RBCs.

		Genetic testings to diagnose sickle cell:
			1- PCR Amplification followed by restriction analysis.
			2- PCR Amplification followed by DNA sequencing.
			3- PCR Amplification followed by hybridisation to Allele-Specific oligonucleotides (ASO).	(ASO Probe will be positive, if its complementary to the gene)
			4- Allele specific PCR, check for presence or absence of product.

		Cystic Fibrosis:
			* Chromosome 7

			* Severe CF results from deletion of CTT at exon 11, results in loss of phenylalanine residues.

		Genetic testings for CF diagnosis:
			1- PCR Amplification followed by DNA sequencing.
			2- PCR Amplification check the size of DNA with gel electrophoresis.
			3- PCR Amplification followed by hybridisation to an Allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO).

		Hemophilia A: 
			* X-Linked Recessive disorder, caused by mutation to coagulation factor F8.
			* Diagnosed with Southern blotting

		Myotonic Dystrophy Type 1:
			* Autosomal dominant, caused by expansion of repeated trinucleotide CTG (Allelic expansion), in the Dystrophia myotonica protein kinase (DMPK) gene.
			* Normal CTG repeats: 5~37
			* Pre-mutation: 38~49
			* Diseased: >= 50

			* Diagnosed with Southern Blotting

		Other mutations that diagnosed with Southern Blotting:
			1- Fragile X syndrome
			2- Huntington disease
			3- Spinocerebellar ataxia
			4- Freidreich ataxia
			5- MD type 2
}
